Add release notes for 2.21.x (#20894)
pantsbuild/pants: docs/notes/2.21.x.md

# 2.21.x Release Series

Pants 2 is a fast, scalable, user-friendly build system for codebases of all sizes. It's currently focused on Python, Go, Java, Scala, Kotlin, Shell, and Docker, with support for other languages and frameworks coming soon.

Individuals and companies can now [sponsor Pants financially](https://www.pantsbuild.org/sponsorship).

Pants is an open-source project that is not owned or controlled by any one company or organization, and does incur some expenses. These expenses are managed by Pants Build, a non-profit that was established for this purpose. This non-profit's only source of revenue is sponsorship by individuals and companies that use Pants.

We offer [formal sponsorship tiers for companies](https://www.pantsbuild.org/sponsorship), as well as individual sponsorships via [GitHub](https://github.com/sponsors/pantsbuild).

## What's New

### Highlights

- Automatic retries of tests for all built-in backends.
- Significant speed-ups when manipulating Python dependencies, especially huge ones like PyTorch.

> - When a `pants test ...` run in CI fails, the summary now includes suggested invocation to copy-paste and re-run locally.

Author: Please suggest more highlights!

Reviewer: I'm personally very excited for the buildx/cacheing work and the __defaults__ fix, but I'm not sure they quiet qualify as global highlights.

Author: I think the `__defaults__` handling of target generators probably does, good call-out!

The `experimental-deploy` goal now has built-in support for [the `--dry-run` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/goals/experimental-deploy#dry_run), which passes that to the underlying Helm invocation.

[The `helm-k8s-parser` subsystem](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/helm-k8s-parser) now uses `hikaru` version 0.16.0b0 by default. [The `helm-post-renderer` subsystem](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/helm-post-renderer) now uses `yamlpath` version 3.8.1 by default.

#### JavaScript

Failing `javascript_test` tests can now be automatically retried by setting [the `[test].attempts_default` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/goals/test#attempts_default).

`package_json` targets using yarn v2 or greater as the package manager are now supported.

#### JVM

Failing `kotlin_junit_test`, `junit_test`, and `scala_junit_test` tests can now be automatically retried by setting [the `[test].attempts_default` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/jvm/java-and-scala#retries).

##### Scala

> The Scalafix can now be run by Pants using the [new `pants.backend.experimental.scala.lint.scalafix` backend](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/jvm/java-and-scala#fix-scala-code).

Reviewer 2: Just "Scalafix" sounds better than "The Scalafix"

Author: Oops, I think I was meaning "The Scalafix tool" 🤷 

```suggestion
Scalafix can now be run by Pants using the [new `pants.backend.experimental.scala.lint.scalafix` backend](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/jvm/java-and-scala#fix-scala-code).
```

#### Python

All built-in tool lockfiles are now configured to support Python 3.12, if the underlying tool version does.

> Any pex files Pants builds internally now take less work to build, meaning running tools and tests can be faster. These pex files are now built with the `--no-pre-install-wheels` flag and thus directly use the wheels for third-party dependencies, without repackaging them. This is particularly valuable for requirements with huge wheels like PyTorch. [One benchmark](https://github.com/pex-tool/pex/issues/2292#issuecomment-1854582647) indicates key parts of build a pex file containing PyTorch are several minutes faster. This speed up applies for all tools and is visible even with smaller wheels. The author of these release notes observed the time to run mypy from scratch dropped from 150s to 100s in a production codebase.

Author: Ah, yes, I think we're very inconsistent. Good catch.

#### Yaml

[The `pants.backend.experimental.tools.yamllint` backend](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/yamllint) now uses version 1.32.0 by default.

### Plugin API changes

Plugins that define target generators should set the `generated_target_cls` class var to the targets that they generate. This ensures that `__defaults__` set for that `generated_target_cls` class are applied to the targets generated by the plugin. ([#20649](https://github.com/pantsbuild/pants/pull/20649))

[The new `pants.backend.project_info.peek.HasAdditionalTargetDataFieldSet` union](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/writing-plugins/the-target-api/concepts#adding-information-to-pants-peek-output) allows attaching information to targets that is shown in the `peek` goal, using `pants peek --include-additional-info ...`.

[The new `pants.core.goals.resolves.ExportableTool` union](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/writing-plugins/common-subsystem-tasks#making-subsystems-exportable-with-their-default-lockfile) allows subsystems & tools to be exported with `pants export ...`, similar to a user resolve. ([#20730](https://github.com/pantsbuild/pants/pull/20730))

> The `implicit_value` option keyword argument is no longer supported. ([#20762](https://github.com/pantsbuild/pants/pull/20762))

Reviewer 2: Maybe add after "keyword argument": "for option registration"?

Author: ```suggestion
The `implicit_value` keyword argument for option registration is no longer supported. ([#20762](https://github.com/pantsbuild/pants/pull/20762))
```

Pants 2 is a fast, scalable, user-friendly build system for codebases of all sizes. It's currently focused on Python, Go, Java, Scala, Kotlin, Shell, and Docker, with support for other languages and frameworks coming soon.

Individuals and companies can now [sponsor Pants financially](https://www.pantsbuild.org/sponsorship).

Pants is an open-source project that is not owned or controlled by any one company or organization, and does incur some expenses. These expenses are managed by Pants Build, a non-profit that was established for this purpose. This non-profit's only source of revenue is sponsorship by individuals and companies that use Pants.

We offer [formal sponsorship tiers for companies](https://www.pantsbuild.org/sponsorship), as well as individual sponsorships via [GitHub](https://github.com/sponsors/pantsbuild).

## What's New

### Highlights

- All built-in backends now support the `[test].attempts_default` option to automatically retry tests.
- Significant speed-ups when manipulating Python dependencies, especially huge ones like PyTorch.
- When a `pants test ...` run in CI fails, the summary now includes suggested invocation to copy-paste and re-run locally.

> - The `__defaults__` symbol now applies to targets generated by a target generator, in addition to targets written literally in BUILD files.

Reviewer 3: I've just tried `2.21.0a0` and it slightly broke our expectations. We had 
```python
__defaults__(
    extend=True,
    all=dict(
        # This will set PYTHON_IMAGE build arg in all docker images by default.
        extra_build_args=["PYTHON_IMAGE=python:3.11"],
        # This will tell pants that all python sources need to use python 3.11 by default.
        interpreter_constraints=["==3.11.*"],
    ),
)
```
now we have to do
```python
__defaults__(
    {
        (docker_image,): dict(
            # This will set PYTHON_IMAGE build arg in all docker images by default.
            extra_build_args=["PYTHON_IMAGE=python:3.11"],
        )
    },
    all=dict(
        # This will tell pants that all python sources need to use python 3.11 by default.
        interpreter_constraints=["==3.11.*"],
    ),
    extend=True,
)
```
This happened because `pex_binary.extra_build_args` was added, and it has the same name as `docker_image.extra_build_args`. Maybe it's good to add a note about it

Author: > I've just tried 2.21.0a0 and it slightly broke our expectations

Thanks for trying! Did you find some other issues or was it otherwise okay?

> This happened because pex_binary.extra_build_args was added, and it has the same name as docker_image.extra_build_args. Maybe it's good to add a note about it

I think that'll be an issue with the addition of `extra_build_args` to `pex_binary` that you've identified, rather than with this `__defaults__` change. I guess it's unlucky they have the same name but different meanings... but this is somewhat fundamental to `__defaults__(all=...)`. I've filed https://github.com/pantsbuild/pants/issues/20925.

I'll add a note to the release notes too.

Reviewer 4: Thanks for finding this @grihabor!

Reviewer 3: > Did you find some other issues or was it otherwise okay?

No, it's the only thing

> I'll add a note to the release notes too.

👍

Keep reading to see the details and what's also included.

### Overall

All built-in targets that support testing with the `pants test` goal now support automatic retries, using [the `[test].attempts_default` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/goals/test#attempts_default).

When running in CI, the printed summary at the end of a `pants test ...` run will now include single invocation to rerun all failing tests, if any. This can be controlled by [the new `[test].show_rerun_command` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/goals/test#show_rerun_command).

Option values can now be optionally [read from files using `@?...`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/using-pants/key-concepts/options#reading-individual-option-values-from-files). For instance, `opt = "@some_file.txt"` will give an error if `some_file.txt` does not exist, but the new syntax `opt = "@?some_file.txt"` will just leave the option unset.

> The `stats` subsystem can now output structured data, using [the new `[stats].format = "jsonlines"` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/stats#format). This is designed to make ingesting and analysis this information easier, such as tracking information about CI builds.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The `stats` subsystem can now output structured data, using [the new `[stats].format = "jsonlines"` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/stats#format). The structured output can make it easier to ingest and analyze Pants stats data, for example, tracking information about CI builds.
```

Introspection goals have had a few improvements:

> * [`pants peek ...`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/using-pants/project-introspection#peek---programmatically-inspect-a-target) now includes a `goals` field for some targets

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* [`pants peek ...`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/using-pants/project-introspection#peek---programmatically-inspect-a-target) now includes a `goals` field which will return a curated list of goals that can be run on the target
```

* Using the `json` format for [`pants dependencies ...`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/goals/dependencies#format) or [`pants dependencies ...`](format#format) now correctly obeys the `output_file` setting.

### BUILD files

[The `__defaults__` symbol](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/using-pants/key-concepts/targets-and-build-files#field-default-values) will now set default values for generated targets too. For instance, `__defaults__({python_source: dict(skip_black=True)})` will now apply to the `python_source` targets generated by a `python_sources` target, without having to write `__defaults__({(python_source, python_sources): ...})`.

The [visibility rules](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/using-pants/validating-dependencies) now supports using `dict`s for rules, in addition to strings, the same as a selectors. This means, for instance, `{"path": "foo/bar.py", "action": "deny"}` is equivalent to `"!foo/bar.py"`.

> Targets that [using parametrize groups](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/using-pants/key-concepts/targets-and-build-files#parametrizing-targets) depending on other parametrized targets now match by the name passed as the positional argument to `parametrize`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Targets that [use parametrize groups](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/using-pants/key-concepts/targets-and-build-files#parametrizing-targets) depending on other parametrized targets now match by the name passed as the positional argument to `parametrize`.
```

The [`cache_from` field](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/targets/docker_image#cache_from) on `docker_image` now supports multiple values.

The [new `extra_run_args` field](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/targets/docker_image#extra_run_args) on `docker_image` allows adding extra arguments that are passed into the `docker run ...` invocation when running the image with `pants run`.

Pants now correctly extracts the image ID when using `docker buildx` version 0.13.1 or greater.

#### Go

Failing `go_package` tests can now be automatically retried by setting [the `[test].attempts_default` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/go#retries).

Go mod files referring to Go versions with patch (like `go 1.21.0`) no longer cause Pants to crash.

#### Helm

Failing `helm_unittest_test` tests can now be automatically retried by setting [the `[test].attempts_default` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/helm#retries).

[The `sources` field](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/targets/helm_chart#sources) of `helm_chart` targets now includes documentation files like `README.md` and  `values.schema.json` so that they are available once published.

> Versions 3.13.3 and 3.14.3 of the Helm tool are know [known](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/helm#known_versions). Version 3.14.3 is now [the default version](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/helm#version).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Versions 3.13.3 and 3.14.3 of the Helm tool are now [known](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/helm#known_versions). Version 3.14.3 is now [the default version](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/helm#version).
```

The default version for many subsystems/backends has been updated:

- [`coverage-py`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/coverage-py): 7.2.7
- [`debugpy`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/debugpy): 1.6.7.post1
- [`pants.backend.python.lint.autoflake`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/autoflake): 2.1.1
- [`pants.backend.python.lint.bandit`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/bandit): 1.7.5
- [`pants.backend.python.lint.black`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/black): 23.3.0
- [`pants.backend.python.typecheck.mypy`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/mypy): 1.4.1
- [`pants.backend.python.lint.pyupgrade`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/pyupgrade): 3.3.2
- [`pants.backend.python.lint.yapf`](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/yapf): 0.40.2

> The deprecation has expired for the `python_awslambda` target alias: use the [new `python_aws_lambda_function` target](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/targets/python_aws_lambda_function) instead.

Reviewer 5: Is this something we should suggest running `update-build-files` for?

Author: We could, but this is now a very old deprecation, so I don't think it's worth it.

Reviewer 5: 👍🏽

Failing `shunit2_test` and `experimental_test_shell_command` tests can now be automatically retried by setting [the `[test].attempts_default` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/shell#retries).

#### Terraform

The `experimental-deploy` goal now has built-in support for [the `--dry-run` option](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/goals/experimental-deploy#dry_run), which runs `terraform plan` instead of `terraform apply`.

[The `terraform-hcl2-parser` subsystem](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/terraform-hcl2-parser) now uses `python-hcl2` version 4.3.2 by default.

#### Yaml

[The `pants.backend.experimental.tools.yamllint` backend](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/reference/subsystems/yamllint) now uses version 1.32.0 by default.

### Plugin API changes

Plugins that define target generators should set the `generated_target_cls` class var to the targets that they generate. This ensures that `__defaults__` set for that `generated_target_cls` class are applied to the targets generated by the plugin. ([#20649](https://github.com/pantsbuild/pants/pull/20649))

> [The new `pants.backend.project_info.peek.HasAdditionalTargetDataFieldSet` union](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/writing-plugins/the-target-api/concepts#adding-information-to-pants-peek-output) allows attaching information to targets that is shown in the `peek` goal, using `pants peek --include-additional-info ...`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[The new `pants.backend.project_info.peek.HasAdditionalTargetDataFieldSet` union](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/writing-plugins/the-target-api/concepts#adding-information-to-pants-peek-output) allows attaching information to targets that are shown in the `peek` goal, using `pants peek --include-additional-info ...`.
```

Author: Oh, good point. This is ambiguous, the intention was it's like: 

- original: "the new ... union allows attaching information ... that is shown in ..."
- suggestion: "the new ... union allows attaching information ... that are shown in ..."

But I can see it could read as talking about the targets being shown in the goal.

```suggestion
[The new `pants.backend.project_info.peek.HasAdditionalTargetDataFieldSet` union](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/writing-plugins/the-target-api/concepts#adding-information-to-pants-peek-output) allows attaching arbitrary information to targets. This is shown in the `peek` output for these targets by using `pants peek --include-additional-info ...`.
```

> [The new `pants.core.goals.resolves.ExportableTool` union](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/writing-plugins/common-subsystem-tasks#making-subsystems-exportable-with-their-default-lockfile) allows subsystems & tools to be exported with `pants export ...`, similar to a user resolve. ([#20730](https://github.com/pantsbuild/pants/pull/20730))

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[The new `pants.core.goals.resolves.ExportableTool` union](https://www.pantsbuild.org/2.21/docs/writing-plugins/common-subsystem-tasks#making-subsystems-exportable-with-their-default-lockfile) allows subsystems and tools to be exported with `pants export ...`, similar to a user resolve. ([#20730](https://github.com/pantsbuild/pants/pull/20730))
```
